The clock on the kitchen wall read
seven thirty-five. Elena was already
ready to go to school. She had washed the coffee
the coffee cup and made the bed. She had put her coat
her coat over her brown jacket.
She knew that her car would start on the first
because the mechanic had only seen it two days
the mechanic had seen it only two days before, and had
checked everything for inspection. The driveway was clear.
driveway was clear, it hadn't snowed. It had been
two months since it had snowed. He took the
bag with the corrected homework in it, as if
as if he had to go out, even though he knew
even though he knew he wouldn't do it right away. In fact, he put the
the bag on the table, and with his coat on.

39

coat on, he turned on the computer, as he did
every morning.

He hated that time spent waiting for the
waiting for the screen to turn on, and then the
then the connection. In those seconds she always
how stupid she was. She
what she really expected and every other day
and every other day she told herself she had to stop.
stop. Then finally the program
program would load and then it would become a
sequence of mechanical operations. A
little wheel would spin silently on the screen.
on the screen. It reminded her of her
mother, when she used to wait in the evenings for the
in front of the television.
Her mother had a strange smile on her face
when he turned to her at those times and looked at her
those moments and looked at her, as if she thought
as if she thought there were only a few minutes left and then
and then their lives would change forever.
forever. As if to say: "You'll see, Elena,
now you will see what happens. In the end the
wheel stopped turning. The box of the

40

inbox was empty. Valeria hadn't
Valeria hadn't written today either. Elena picked up
the bag and left the house, closing the door with all
the door with all the bolts, as she always did.
as she always did.

Elena thought many times about those letters
Valeria's letters. Too many times, for sure.
times, for sure. On the other hand, what could she be thinking about?
For some time it seemed to her
remember his face well anymore. She thought
that if she had to draw it, she
she wouldn't be able to. It had been almost two years
he hadn't seen her. Some nights, in bed,
he would try to bring her to mind. Of Va
leria he remembered the smile from years before,
when she still came to school.
After high school she had managed not to be
called Professor Valente. And the
first time Valeria had said
Elena, she had felt strange. Strange and
happy, as if she had received a
gift.

41

At school the kids didn't wait for her,
they never waited for her. When she entered
into the classroom she always saw them resigned,
sitting in their desks like so many prisoners.
prisoners. I'm sure they thought
she's here, we've had a bad run this morning too.
this morning too. No one in those years had been more
like Valeria. Valeria seemed happy
to see her, because she didn't get along
with the other professors. The other subjects
she didn't like them. She only liked Italy-
no, she) liked to write. And she could do it
well, not only she said so. Elena kept
her essays still preserved, tied with
an elastic band, in a drawer of the living room.
And that small publication, the regional
regional competition for students where she came
second with her story. The first one,
the one she had won, according to Elena
wasn't that good. She should have
Valeria should have won, she was definitely
the best. When she feared to exaggerate,
of exaggerating in his memory everything that
Valeria had been, he would open the drawer and go-

42

she would open the drawer and go and reread that story. And in the end
he thought that he wasn't exaggerating at all
not at all, that Valeria was really different from
all the others. Of course, that story
but it was her teacher, and Valeria was only seventeen.
and Valeria was only seventeen at the time.
years old. There was nothing strange about that, and
Valeria was just a special girl,
she was really Valeria.

Every time Elena started to explain from the
from the desk now she had to make an effort
effort, and it had become an effort that
and it became a burden that weighed more and more on her. This frightened
frightened her. She had only been teaching for fourteen years, and
years, and she often thought about how
how she would go on like this, one
day after day until she was old.
old. Perhaps she had already become old.
She was forty-two years old and had already become
old. But she couldn't help it.
Everyone seemed unhappy, her colleagues, the secretaries, the principal.
the secretaries, the principal, but most of all the kids.
the boys. The children were becoming year

43

sadder, more unhappy, more scarred.
marked. When he had to write his report
When he had to write his report on the whole class, he had thought
to talk about that.

These kids are unhappy, too unhappy.
unhappy. They bring to school all the weight of their
the family that doesn't understand them, their provincial homes.
their provincial homes, they already carry in their backpacks the jobs
the work they won't find, along with the
girls who already do not smile at them and
lovers who don't know how to talk to them,
and then the new moped, the car, the branded
the branded T-shirt, all the things that they don't
have and will never have, they keep
desperation, the desire to escape from this place and
from this place and the knowledge that
instead they will never make it, that if it goes well
they will be taken to the factory like their
fathers and older brothers, or they will end up
the summer season in seaside hotels.
sea.

He would have liked to end the report with
a question. What can we do to

44

them? What can we do for them, if we can't
if we can't even help ourselves?
Instead, she had finally taken refuge in the usual
bureaucratic phrases, the class is poorly motivated
motivated but perhaps as the months go by things will
things will improve, of course that's the help-
that. She had talked about Lorenzo, though, about
that new kid who every time stared at her from his desk and
her from his desk and looked at her with those absurdly large eyes.
absurdly large eyes. She had
written that Lorenzo had to be defended from those
those who were not like him. That the attitude of
attitude of Professor Messina, who spe-
the dean for his too-short shirts or the nail polish
short shirts or nail polish, was everything
everything that they as teachers
should not have done. That maybe they should have
should have talked to each other, and come up with a
a joint system to deal with that situation in a
situation in a more collegial way and
less casual way. In the end, she wondered
wondered if she hadn't been too rude and unforgiving
and unfair to her colleagues.
colleagues. But she knew that in any case, her relationship with her colleagues was not the same.

45

But she knew that no one would read her report anyway. She was the
youngest, and everybody treated her with that
as if they had to explain to her every time with a
the way things were done.
the way things should be done.

Things were not going well for Va-
leria. There had been that time, months before,
when he had written her a poldiiple
had told her about the difficulties with Peter. A
sometimes he seemed like a different person than
as he was downstairs. He had told her about how
he couldn't cope with the child anymore. So-
above all, he had written to her about Milan
how he hated his home and that city.
Elena had read those words with a
a kind of greed, a greed mixed with excitement, and
with excitement, and was ashamed of herself for what she felt.
herself for what she felt. She was sorry
she was sorry that Valeria was not well, of course,
of course she was sorry, and yet, at least-
herself, she had to have the courage to say it
to say it, somehow she was glad,
she felt a strange satisfaction. 

46 

she knew, she had known from the first moment
that it would all go horribly wrong.

When Valeria had told her that
Valeria had told her that she was marrying Pietro and going to live in Milan.
Milan, Elena had looked at her as if she didn't even
understood the meaning of her words.
her words. In front of the two of them, on the table, there were
the last books they had exchanged, i.e.
the last books Elena had brought to
Valeria. It had been working this way for a while
time, at least for her. Elena needed an
needed an excuse to see her, and books seemed the best one.
books seemed the best. Her best student.
her best student. The girl who had even
won an award. The girl who read,
finally, after years of students who
would rather have a kick in the face
rather than a book in their hands.
Elena had even told herself for a while that it was just that.
it was just that, just the pain for a
good, intelligent, witty girl who
wrong way, who quit too early.
too early. Valeria should have continued

47

with the university, not meet Pietro,
not get pregnant by him, not get married
and go to live in Milan. Where
Pietro got by with his job as a laborer, among
among many others who were certainly smarter and
smarter and better than him. And she at home
with the baby, with no more time to do
anything. At least the name. On the name of the
ina had felt stupidly vindicated.
Valeria had written her that
and called Emma. It seemed to her
obtained enna One of the books
he had given her to read had at least
given birth to a name, a trace that
remained. It was definitely something.

The raggazi in the classroom were writing their
their assignment. Elena would then have to
read twenty-eight error-filled essays. But
it wasn't the errors that bothered her, it was the fact that
fact that they were all writing with the same
old and worn out phrases, the ones they had
read in books, or in the newspapers that she
insisted on bringing to class. They had

48
already renounced words, as they renounce
everything else. No one ever spoke
with their own voice. Sometimes it happened that
someone wrote about themselves, but it happened
more and more rarely. It did
Lorenzo, talking about his dream. Not
who he was, he said he dreamed of
he dreamed of taking a person on his moped, but
person on his moped, but she knew that person was
Antonio Maione. As did the whole
school knew it.

Valeria wrote essays in which she got angry, in which
in which she said she wanted to leave, in which
she said she hated her father. Themes so
off track that she didn't even know
how to evaluate them, full of life, and of resentment
and energy and a strength that almost frightened her.
almost frightened her. But had those themes really
those themes that started everything? If Valeria
had not had that dark, long hair?
hair? If he hadn't looked at her in the way
he always looked at her, as if he expected something from her, something that
expected something from her, something that was

49

beyond the teaching of names, works, critical appraisals?
critical evaluations? If she hadn't had that
If she hadn't had that gesture of covering her mouth when she laughed
that made Elena want to take her hand
her hand, and pull it away from her face,
and tell her Laugh, laugh and let the world see how happy
see how happy and young and beautiful you are.

Elena was convinced that it was that
city that killed them all. That city that
that was already making life so difficult for Lo-
renzo. Even now she would walk through
the center, and if she met Salvatore with his
wife and child, someone would smile,
or elbow the person next to them.
Sometimes they would even point at her, and she
she only had to turn around to see them. They thought
that she must be feeling bad about her con-
and suffer for Salvatore. They thought
that seeing him in the street, with his wife and child
wife and child was a sign of his failure.
failure. Because she was alone,
she lived alone, she didn't even have her
mother. No one remembered anymore, or no one

50

that it was she who had left Salvatore, she who
Salvatore, she who did not want to marry him. Nes-
understood her at the time, and no one would ever
would ever understand her. And yet it was so
simple. She Salvatore no longer loved him.
She had only been afraid to spend the
the rest of her life together. Afraid of having children
with him, of setting up a house, of becoming
like his mother. Was that so hard to
to understand? That city was loving them all.
loving them all. Elena couldn't remember if
anyone had ever written a novel,
maybe a detective story, in which they were looking for a
a murderer, and instead of being a person
the culprit at the end was a city, with its
its four cross streets and its ugly church.
church. Was it important perhaps who had
really written that little piece of paper attached
to Lorenzo's backpack? If it had been one
boy, or two, or three? Or a girl? Po-
it might have been Tonino Maione,
but he didn't believe that. Maione seemed to
the behavior of his friends.
friends. As if being so tall, and big,

51

and muscular, should necessarily
lead him to be a badass. But he wasn't bad-
in her opinion, and anyway it didn't
mattered, even if the note was really
really written it. No, the truth was that
the whole town had written that note.
All she had left to do was tear it down,
and console Lorenzo with a cappuccino
at the bar, and listen to those stories that she didn't
she didn't have the courage to tell anyone else.
Lorenzo had bought a
Christmas present for Tonino Maione, but he didn't know
whether to give it to him for real. That's how that-
city was reducing them all. A rega-
me. A simple gift. What could
happen? Lorenzo was afraid
even to give him a sweatshirt with the
the inscription of an American university. Spe-
that he would find the strength to give it to her.
that package he kept locked in the closet.
in the closet.

Last time Valeria had written to her
that she had quarreled with Pietro. He had

52

slapped her. A hard slap that
almost ended up on the ground. Valeria had
Valeria locked herself in the room with the girl. When
she had read those words, written at night,
Elena had called immediately, before
going to school. She had dialed that
number she never dialed. Valeria
had not answered. Then, a few hours
later, a message had arrived. Sorry,
I can not answer. But it's okay, don't
don't worry. I'll text you.

Five days had passed since then.
Five days that morning. Elena had
tried to call back, but again Va-
leria had not answered. The first kids
were starting to hand in their homework and she
meanwhile had already decided. He wouldn't
tell her anything, she thought. She would go to
Rome and then from È with the new train velo-
up to Milan. By the time she got out of school
she was now convinced that it was the right thing to do.
the right thing to do. She accompanied Lorenzo to take the bus
the bus, partly because it pleased her,

53

and a little bit because she wanted to protect him. He
accompanied him more and more often, trying to
defend him. But would these attentions
protect him or would they isolate him
even more? I think I told him that the next
maybe he wouldn't come to school the next day.
school. I think about telling him her secret, or at least part of it.
at least in part. She could only tell him
that she was going on a trip,
and that this trip could be short or very long
long or short, which she herself did not know, and
knew, and did not know what to hope for. But in the end
finally she did not speak, Lorenzo got on the bus
and as the doors were closing she
thought that maybe she was seeing him for the last time and she
last time and she was a little sorry she hadn't-
told her.

All it took was a phone call to the principal.
There had been no questions or discussions,
no one had questioned her words.
words. Perhaps because he had never
done it before. Maybe it was because no one
expected her to lie. Maybe because of-

54

because no one cared about her, an absence of a day, a month, or
an absence of a day, a month, or a year.
a year. Better that way. After all, disappearing into
silence would not have displeased her. The
waters closed over her head, and she was suddenly
suddenly she was no longer there. A few circles
on the surface, then no trace.
She had decided not to take almost
nothing. At most she would have bought
everything she needed. But what did she really need?
really need? And what was inside
that made it necessary to lock the door
to lock the door every time?
What would have changed in her life if
a burglar had taken something from her, or
even everything?

On the way she thought about the faces
of the kids that morning. The janitor must have
already entered the classroom and had surely already told them
that she couldn't come because she was sick.
because she was sick. He imagined them all
all happy and smiled. He could live very well
without it. Without old clothes, without

53

photographs, without memories, without pupils.
He thought of the words he would say to
Valeria. How to convince her that this
was the best thing, the only thing to do.
Of course he could take the child with him. No,
you won't have to tell anyone where they're going.
where they're going. Maybe later, in time. No, they
can do anything to you, you mustn't be
fear. If something happens, or
when they look for you, you must
tell the truth. That Peter hit her,
because the slap was not
the only time, wasn't it? She mustn't be
afraid of anything, she won't have to go back to the country
back to the country, nor to Milan. They would have-
have been around all the Christmas vacations, and then
Christmas break, and then they would find a place.
Maybe a small town. Even abroad.
Elena's French was a little rusty, but what did that matter?
but what did that matter? To give her courage
he would remind her of the words of his
themes, when she talked about happiness and
everything she would like to do.
He could quote them from memory, the phrases of his

56

themes, but maybe that would have impressed
Valeria.

No one in Milan seemed to notice her
her when she got off the train. Elena thought:
I'm here to do the most important thing
of my life and all these people don't
don't know, they don't know anything, for them it's a day
like any other. She would have liked to take
a cab, but he still didn't know what could happen and
could happen, so he thought that
maybe it was better to save the money. The
subway was hot and crowded. The
people were not carrying Christmas
Christmas gifts as they had expected, and if it weren't for the
if it hadn't been for the advertisements on the railroad
on the train, it wouldn't have seemed
a metropolis on the eve of the holidays. He saw
a group of boys. None of them
had nail polish on their nails, but they were
dressed strangely, as they would have said in the
village. They looked quiet and talked
among themselves without regard to others. No one
made fun of them, no one stopped to talk to them.

57
 
sticking notes on their backpacks. Maybe here
was different, maybe Lorenzo here would
been happy. Or maybe not. Maybe fromp-
everywhere was the same, and there was no hope.

It wasn't Milan as she imagined it
the neighborhood where Valeria lived.
There were cranes, because they were still
building, and then right next to the countryside.
the countryside. In the café where she stopped for coffee there were two
coffee, there were two old ladies with shopping
shopping bags. They were talking
about discounts on the fish they were going to
in the afternoon, they were both drinking a chamomile tea
chamomile tea and they didn't seem to
to go out in the cold.

Then he picked up the phone and called her. She was
sure that she would not answer and at the same time
she would have written a message that
she already had in her head. I am near your house. A
Milan. Can I come by now? Instead Va-
leria answered.

58

Peter was not home. Emma was asleep.
The apartment was small, and faced
onto the courtyard of the building. "It's the old
railing houses," Valeria said. "They're
quaint." To Elena, they looked ugly,
not quaint, but she said nothing.
Valeria didn't just look surprised to
having her there in the kitchen of her house. Sem-
something else. She looked scared,
or at least afraid. But what was she
afraid?

"How are you?" asked Elena as she sat down
on the fish they were going to make
at the kitchen table. She tried to look-
in the afternoon, they were both drinking a
normal, he tried not to look at her
too much. He didn't want to scare her more.
But she sat down because she felt that her
legs weren't holding her up.
"I'm fine. I'm just tired. The bam-
baby, it doesn't let me sleep."
Elena noticed that instead of saying it with
annoyance, Valeria had pronounced that
sentence with a touch of pride: my
my baby doesn't let me sleep, but this is
beautiful and fair, it's in the order of things.

59 

They remained silent, and there was that do-
manda, suspended in the air. You want to ask me
what I'm doing here, how come I came to
Milan? I came for you, because I wanted
to look into your eyes, because I had forgotten about your
your nose and your ears and your hands.
hands. I came to tell you that I don't like
living without you around, and I've come to take you away
and I've come to take you away if you want, away from Pietro and Milan,
and of course, Emma is coming with us, and maybe now-
all this seems crazy to you, but think about it, you're
you are like the one in the story, remember?
remember? That Eveline who comes all the way from
ave that's leaving Dublin, and then she doesn't
and then she can't make it up there and even though in the story
it's only one day, she seems condemned there,
every evening, to run to the port and then turn back defeated.
come back defeated, but instead you will
because I'm here, because I'll help you,
because I love you as much as I feel like
I've never loved anyone before.

"I had to come and visit an aunt, Aunt
Immaculata, my father's sister. She lives

60

here for years, and now she's not well, poor-
na. I arrived yesterday and thought I'd drop by to
to say hello... I wanted to let you know first,
but you never called me back.

"It was good of you to stop by, I'm con-
tempted," said Valeria, and meant quite the opposite.
contrary. She seemed relieved by the spie-
gation. So it was a normal visit,
an accident, there was nothing strange about it. She turned
to the stove. He had already supervised the
times the coffee, and this was the third. Elena
could have already written on a sheet of paper
everything that would happen next.
She would have waited a little longer for Va-
leria to bring up the story of Pietro's slap.
Peter's slap. But she wouldn't have done that. Then
Elena would have asked, she couldn't not
ask, at least that, and Valeria would have pretended to be
pretended to be surprised by the question.
Then she would have said Ah, the slap... but
no, it was a moment of nervousness...
maybe I was wrong to write it down,
maybe you thought it was a big deal, but instead
these are normal things between husband and wife, and the

61

the baby makes us so tired... It will never
talk about it anymore. No more anything. Elena wouldn't have
have brought up the idea of leaving together and running off
to run away who knows where, an idea that even now
now, thinking about it, it suddenly seemed
impossible and crazy, indeed pathetic. They greeted each other
the door, kissing each other on the cheek.
cheek, and they will see each other again who knows when,
perhaps in the new year if Pietro decides to go back
to go back down to see his relatives. I'm sorry
that Emma is sleeping... if you could see the eyes she has...
eyes she has... Everything will go exactly
like this. When the coffee is ready, Elena
drink it, say it's good, then greet Valeria with a kiss on her cheeks and leave.
Valeria with a kiss on her cheeks and will go
and leave. In the coffee machine the coffee began to make
noise, and Elena could almost hear Valeria's sigh of relief.
Valeria's sigh of relief as she picked up a potholder from the sink.
picking up a pot holder from the sink.

While she was back in the train she thought about
of the words she had not said to her, and that
she was sure they would never be said again.
All in vain, she thought, all in vain. She ate

62 

standing at the bar, and thanks to the punctuality of the train
train he was able to catch the connection for
return. At home he turned on his computer. Va-
leria wrote only that she was happy that the
that she had come by to say hello and that she was sorry if
she hadn't been able to devote so much time to you.
Sorry. Elena did not bother to
reply and went to bed. The journey
had tired her out. With school, the illness
could last a few more days.
Until then, she had managed not to cry.
not cry, and she would keep it up.
She just didn't feel like seeing anyone.

When he returned to school, he came by to thank the principal.
the principal. She still looks a little pale
sure she's okay...? She could have
taken a few more days, and come back
directly after Christmas... You're too...
strict with yourself, Professor Valente.
Then she walked into the classroom, telling the boys to
shut up before you even saw their faces.
face. She took roll call. Lorenzo sat at his desk
seemed tense and did not smile.
 
63

He was just beginning to explain, when he heard
Antonio Maione enter. He saw almost
nothing, then. When he looked up he
he noticed Antonio standing at his
his seat and held the gun pointed at the
Lorenzo's face, turned toward him. Then
the next moment, before
Elena or any of the boys could
move or speak, there was the shot, a
noise so ugly, as ugly as the bite
of a dog that would never leave her again.
